Cheers.
Sorry. It's good, but it's good to do. No, sure.
Thank you so much for waiting.
Yeah,
just there's two,
Two.
It's good. Good to have think, think Billy actually, me.
Quite intense. I think.
I don't think I'm gonna ask. You might.
It's because I'm, I'll bring you back. Yes.
Okay.
Alright. Well, uh, good morning
and welcome to the Social Services
and Community Select Committee.
Uh, so this morning we have, uh, ministry
for Disabled People, um, 60 minutes.
And what I might do is ask you to first introduce yourselves
and then make some introductory comments.
Uh, I will also make the observation
that we have interpreters assisting us who are online,
and so they'll ask everyone to just remember that
and, uh, try to, you know, not talk too fast
and allow time, uh, for the interchange of answers
and questions and answers as we go with that.
Um, thank you. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. I was going to
begin by making
that same point about our NZSL interpreters,
the Ministry of Disabled People.
My name's Paula. I'm the Secretary for Disabled People
and Chief Executive of the Ministry.
My signed name is Two Fists,
moving in a forward direction like bicycle,
reflecting my past as a Paralympic cyclist.
Uh, and I'm sitting with colleagues wearing a, uh,
light blue jacket
and I have dark blonde short hair swep to one side.
I'm joined today by my colleagues Ben O Mirror,
deputy Chief Executive Policy and Insights.
Jenny Badley, deputy CE Strategy and Enablement.
Rebecca Alvy, deputy C Outreach and Innovation,
and Elle Baker Katu, chief Advisor Maori.
So today is our birthday.
It's been one year since the ministry became a standalone
public service department, as you've indicated, Mr.
Chair, I'll just spend a few minutes, uh,
outlining some key things
that we have been doing over the past year
before handing over to the committee for questions.
We've been really focused on building a strong foundation
since the machinery of government changes
and shifting to our new structure
and operating model has allowed us to redefine
how we can drive real
and meaningful change for disabled people.
Our new role means looking across sectors
and thinking both short
and long term about the outcomes that matter.
To do this, we are focused on six strategic outcome areas
across accessibility, education, employment, health,
housing, and justice.
These shape our priorities
and work program, which include firstly the refresh
of the New Zealand disability strategy.
We launched tomorrow morning and sets the direction
or disability across government for the next five years.
Last month, we launched the New Zealand Sign Language
Strategy to ensure that NZSL thrives in.
We have also made progress
with other government agencies on implementing the
recommendations that were made to the government
by the United Nations Convention on Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Committee, we've continued
to provide advice on the Royal Commission into abuse
and care response.
To shape the government's response, we have firmed up
and started delivering on our accessibility work program,
including strengthening the alternate format
service across government.
We have invested in initiatives
to create employment opportunities in the public service,
including our recently launched cross agency summer
internship program for disabled students, which saw
13 disabled students placed across 13 government agencies.
And we've continued
to build our ministry to achieve our vision.
We also support cross government priorities
by providing second opinion policy advice,
offering disability expertise,
and brokering opportunities for disabled people
to influence policy.
As part of our stewardship role, we keep an overview of
and contribute to major issues such as transport
and technology developments.
Essential to all of this is the ministry's work alongside
disabled people, t Maori
and their whanau to drive meaningful change
their perspectives, experience and voice are essential.
Everybody in ROA has a role in improving the
lives of disabled people.
And so we will continue
to build relationships across central
and local government, business and industry
and the community to make change happen.
Our ability to deliver our work rests on a strong
and well performing ministry.
While disabled people still face many barriers,
we are now in an excellent, strong position
to accelerate progress.
Our vision remains clear, disabled people
thriving in New Zealand.
I'm happy to take your questions. Thank you.
Um, first question. Thank you.
Um, thank you for that overview
and, um, the work that you're doing.
Um, I've got a question
around the employment side of things.
You've mentioned the initiatives within the public service
seen that in the annual report as well.
Um, you will also know that the unemployment figure,
the June quarter shows the unemployment figure
for disabled people is 14.1% the highest it's ever been
since it was recorded in 2017.
Um, you would've also heard from disabled people
that many are struggling to put food on the table
and to, um, access the basic necessities of life.
What employment initiatives are underway that are new that,
uh, f Kaha is supporting
or investing in, um, to shift those figures?
Your performance measures are just
around the employment rate going up under utilization going
down and the pay gap going down.
Um, but what are the initiatives that will get us there?
Thank you for that question.
So, um, there are a number of things that we are doing.
Um, so you are right.
The employment gap between disabled people
and non-disabled people in New Zealand is too wide,
and that's due to a range of things.
It's around lack of reasonable accommodation
and supports for disabled people.
It can be related to transport and wider infrastructure.
Um, we know that disabled people are less likely
to have a post post school qualification,
and we know that there continue to be attitude.
So those are some of the barriers to employment.
The things that we are doing are as follows.
Firstly, uh,
members will see tomorrow when the New Zealand disability
Strategy is released, that there are a number of actions
that ministers have agreed to around employment, uh, which
we are confident will help with narrowing that gap.
Um, members may have seen some
of those draft actions in the strategy.
Uh, the final strategy comes out tomorrow.
I touched briefly on the internship program
across the public service.
That is really important
because the public service has an opportunity
to be a real role model in this space.
This is the first time that we have gone across government
with such an internship program with 10 agencies, um,
taking disabled young people
and giving them a foot in the door.
Some of those people had not worked for years
and were just looking for that opportunity.
The next thing that we will be launching in the first part
of next calendar year is our employment website.
So what we know from our engagement,
both in the public sector
and private sector, is
that actually most employers want to do the right thing.
Where some of the difficulties arise is in having access
to good information
and good advice in a good suite of policies.
So we are responding to that
by launching an employment website in the first part
of next year, and we'll be doing a lot of, um,
promotional activity around that.
And that's intended to be a, a, um, support base
for employers.
We are also, um, working much more closely
with the private sector than we've had the opportunity
to do in the past.
And so working with organizations, um,
to really lift that number.
We've also started working with the Institute of Directors
and shaping up a work program
around governance and other opportunities.
So there is a lot to be done in the, uh,
New Zealand disability strategy.
You will see that there are a range of, um, indicators
to measure success over the next five years.
So those are the things that, uh,
we are doing in leading most of that work, uh, as well
as contributing to other government initiatives.
Um, are you aware that organizations
that have a government contract to place
disabled people into work have had a change in their
contract obligations such that they can only have 10%
of their clientele who are non beneficiaries,
thus impacting a number of people
who may not receive a government benefit
and want work who cannot be placed into work?
I'm not aware of that specific change,
but we are really focused on closing
that employment gap between disabled people
and non-disabled people.
The trend has been, uh, that gap has
trended the same for a very long time now,
and it is really important.
Our minister holds the employment portfolio as well
as disability, and it's an area of, um,
great interest to her.
It's great to see you all this morning.
Thank you for being here.
So, um, wanting to know what assurances you can provide
that f Kaha is genuinely making progress on its core mandate
to drive meaningful change for disabled people
when the ministry's current performance measures focused
largely on internal policy advice quality
and do not yet include clear measurable indicators,
especially for outcomes
that rely on coordinated actions across other government
agencies, for example, housing, education
and, um, and jobs.
Thank you for that question. Um, you are right.
There are only two performance measures, uh,
when a new agency is a is established members maybe
where you have a relatively short period of time
to develop your statement of strategic contentions.
And we didn't have sufficient time to develop longer term,
uh, indicators, cases.
The, um, so the two that are,
that we've reported on in our annual report, um,
next year we will be reporting on more performance measures.
Some of the things to bear in mind, um, around
demonstrating that outcomes for disabled people, uh,
hopefully improve, uh, work that, um,
supports the outcomes framework
for the New Zealand disability strategy.
So what you'll see tomorrow is a very clear outcomes
framework that shows what the current data indicates
and then where we expect that
to go over the next five years.
So that's really important
and it will be very clear when the implementation plan comes
out next calendar year,
which agencies are responsible for that.
And VA Kaha has a key role in leading
or contributing to that.
The second, um, set of measures that
I think are important to be aware of is
I talked briefly about the recommendations
that the government is implementing that the UN recommended
to New Zealand in 2022.
Those actions all sit on the human rights monitor,
that the Ministry of Justice, um, administers,
and people can go into that
and will be updated again early next year with
where those different actions are at.
And that's an important contribution in terms
of measuring better outcomes.
Just a couple of other very specific things
that we, we are doing.
Um, we have worked really hard to improve the quality
of data and evidence around disabled people in New Zealand.
And one of the things we've done is join the Social
Investment agency mahi tahi data
and analytics platform so that we can start
to have interactive dashboards
and share the progress of disabled people in New Zealand.
And we also fund research, um, that is, uh, undertaken
by the Donald Beasley, um, institute
who look at particular areas
of outcomes for disabled people.
Mm-hmm. So the long
and short of that, um, is this is a moment in time
where we only have those two performance measures.
They will increase in our annual reporting next year,
as well as all
of the other more external reporting things that I touched on.
Oh, thank you so much. It's great to hear that
that's coming and we look forward to seeing it.
So with those, um, the strategy coming out tomorrow
and those expected, um, things to be published next year,
we can expect to see that whole
of government performance framework
that clearly links fa kaha work
and the work of partner agencies
to measurable improvements in the lives
of disabled people in their whanau.
Fantastic. Um, I've just got a couple more subs.
So what steps are being taken to encourage agencies
to work in accordance with enabling good lives principles
and that approach for across government?
So in our strategic documents, we talk about
being guided by, uh, t
and also the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with disabilities and the principles of enabling good lives.
And last year the government, um, uh,
expressed its continued support for the principles
of enabling good lives.
We, um, meet with the National Enabling Good Lives group.
We are just right now in the process of agreeing, um, a
training program for our staff so that, um, we can make sure
that when we are working across government, we
can talk about enabling good lives principles
to the same extent as we can the UN CRPD
in our policy work across government.
So, um, in the period under review, we've
provided advice on a significant number of, um, policies
that agencies, um, have consulted with us on.
That's, you know, part of our key role
and we often talk about the principles
of enabling good lives, um, the eight principles
and the importance of those principles
and the lives of disabled people.
Thank you. I've Just got, I'm gonna stop on that. Sure.
Um, will, you mentioned meeting with the NGL group.
Um, is it true that they're going to be downgraded
and will no longer be a ministerial advisory group?
I,
We are working through
with the National Enabling Good Lives Group at the moment,
uh, what our relationship agreement looks like with them.
What's the timeframe on that?
Um, we are working through, in the short term,
getting the training program established
and then looking longer term what other key pieces
of work we can do together.
But one of the things that I'm really conscious of, um, is
the number of disabled peoples organizations
and representatives groups, um, family groups who want
to engage with vaha
and we work really hard to make sure
that we have good relationships and agreements in place.
So you can't rule out that they won't be downgraded
and will no longer be a ministerial advisory group.
That's a decision for the minister. Thank
You.
I a supplementary just on the, um, what you said
before about the, uh, IDI
and the, uh, social Investment Agency agency, we, we,
we heard from them this morning, um,
and just really interested in, in the, uh,
relationship into play as much as it goes.
And, but between your, um, department
and the Social investment agency
and the IDI, you know, the collection of data and,
and the expression of that back to sort of dashboarding
to communities and also to decision makers, how, how is
that relationship, um, shaping up?
Yeah, thanks Mr. Chair. Early work.
Um, but we have a really strong relationship
with the Social investment agency.
I touched before that we are part of that mahi um, platform.
So we are able to share our data
and create those interactive, um, dashboards.
And one of the things that we know in New Zealand is
that we need to significantly improve the quality
and availability of data and respect of disabled people.
And so we'll be drawing on that information as well
as survey information, um,
to report against the New Zealand disability strategy.
We also work with the social investment agency generally
around, um, what kinds of initiatives
and longer term sort of planning can we think about so
that we are supporting disabled people early
for better longer term outcomes.
Thank you. You a supplementary.
Thank you. Um, Yeah,
So with, um, the reporting, I was quite just surprised
to see that, um, it was simply recording the directional
trends of like up and down.
Can we, um, expect to have more fulsome, um,
or different, um, ways
of reporting that data in next year's annual re report?
Like, like you're saying, it was set up, really
the change happened really quickly,
this was part of that change.
So, um, yeah, having up
and down doesn't quite provide the transparency
around the government agencies collectively improving the
outcomes for the, um, 850,000 New Zealanders,
um, living with a disability.
Disability. Yeah.
Yeah. So, um, the short answer is yes, we'll be working to
refine and provide more granular information.
The extent to which we can do that
critically depends on the quality of administrative data
that is available across governments.
And so that's why we are also putting quite a lot
of effort into, um, across government community of practice
and disability and data evidence
and working group to lift the quality of data, um,
available across government to,
to better understand outcomes for disabled people.
And we also rely on general social, um,
or general survey, sorry, information.
So what we are really pleased to see now,
and this has been increasing in, in the last sort of five
or so years, is the number of general surveys, which include
questions related to disability.
So we are getting a much richer picture from survey data
and we need to lift the quality of administrative data so
that we can give a more desegregated,
granular set of measures.
So that's our intention rather than a up or down.
So our work within with, um, the social investment agency
has a particular focus on identifying, uh, markers
for disability within administrative data so
that we can do more granular, granular
and detailed analysis, um, based on particular groups.
So it might be learning disabled, it might be people, uh,
who have sensory disabilities, um,
those sorts of pieces of work.
And we need to develop, uh, what are described
as code modules to enable that more detailed work to happen.
Thank you. Um, another supplemental on
that point actually, because just, uh, visiting a lot
of my schools, you know, personally across my, um,
across my region there,
there's obviously a very significant cohort of students
who have a variety of, uh, learning disabilities.
Mm-hmm. And one of the challenges is
certainly identification.
The other one is the appropriate resources, um,
to assist with that.
Uh, our is is some of your policy works,
obviously there's crossover, probably social investment
to some degree, um, ministry of Education.
How much, how much of that work is sort of sits within your
bucket of sort of responsibility, so to speak,
and how much is that a relationship
with the Ministry of Education, for example?
Yeah, we've, we've got a really, um, strong relationship
with the Ministry of Education.
Um, the Ministry of Education,
we're involved in the New Zealand disability Strategy
working group, um, as were officials from Fa Kaha
and the community and,
and other experts, um, who looked at a series of actions,
uh, which will be revealed tomorrow, um, that talk about how
to lift, um, uh, opportunities
for disabled young people in education.
Key to that as well is lifting performance
and quality of data.
And so we have been working really hard with the Ministry
of Education on that.
Thank you. And your question, Paula,
Um, uh, thank you firstly for all the work that you do
and, and I'm Marie, um, I'm eager to see, uh,
progress going forward, but just going back to, uh,
the restructure and the focus on, on change processes
and, um, could I just ask quickly how
that would've impacted on your 20 24, 25 work, uh, program?
Um, and then following that, um, would there have been,
would that have been a reason for underspend, uh, on some
of your work programs and how did that, um, all work out?
Yeah, thank you for that question.
So the short answer is yes, we did have an underspend,
um, of 4.38 million.
Um, the significant portion of that funding
was funding given to us to establish the ministry.
Um, so around accessible properties technology, for example,
um, we do have approval to transfer
that into the current financial year.
And so we have a, a particular project aimed at,
um, spending that money.
So the underspend is largely, uh, it is due
to just not having the runway, um, to spend that money.
Uh, we have a very comprehensive
work program across the six areas that I touched on, um,
to make the greatest use of,
of those public funds this year.
Yeah.
Um, um, just to reflect back,
it's reflected in the report,
but I just wanted to come back to, uh, your, um, some
of your early discussion around, uh, the underpinned
by tgi.
Um, so can you, can the ministry,
can you provide some concrete examples of actions taken
to uphold to Titi, and then just a sub on that
and what measurable indicators, uh, exist
to track the equity improvements of
that based on the six that you referred
To Gil?
Thank you for that question.
So I think first and foremost, the evidence continues
to show the disparity between, um, disabled people
and tongue kaha Maori.
So there are a range of things that, um, we are doing, uh,
to, um, honor our obligations under which, uh,
as an agency, you know, like we,
I take my responsibilities really seriously.
Key to that has been building a broader set
of relationships.
So we have, um, involved t Maori in all
of our major work streams, so on advisory groups
and in our key projects like the New Zealand disability, uh,
strategy, like our accessibility advisory group and others.
We have also, um, broadened our relationship
to this year establishing a relationship
with the Iwi Leaders Forum, um,
and working to strengthen our relationships
with t Kaha Maori groups.
We support the TUR Maori Advisory Group for
the New Zealand Sign Language Board.
So we've helped strengthen, um, the group
with work they wanted to do around leadership.
For example, one of the things in establishing a new agency
that I was very mindful of is making sure that the
structure had the right roles.
And so I was very keen to ensure that
Katu chief Advisor Maori, is on the executive team, um,
that we have a, who can guide us around the, the tega, um,
and approaches for the ministry.
We also, this year, invested in a kaiga, um,
Maori researcher and a Maori engagement lead
for the New Zealand disability strategy
to really help us get into some of the harder
to reach areas of New Zealand.
I think in terms of your, um, well actually just
before I come to your specific question about indicators,
um, we are also doing a, a lot of work, um,
through Elle's great leadership around, uh, working to
increase the ministry's capability around, um,
Ang and taking a Maori, um, approach to our work.
So our policy group, for example, did some training on, um,
or making sure that we are bringing
that perspective into our, um, policy work
and around the indicators of success for tga, kaha,
Maori, um, where there is data available.
We want to be able to, um, break that down in terms of
how we measure against those five areas in the strategy.
So that's going to be a, a focus of the work,
um, in the new year. Just a
Quick one, if I may.
Thank you. Uh, I'm, I'm encouraged.
Uh, I, I like,
and I get, uh, um, connecting to
what you're saying, it's encouraging.
I, um, Paula, can you, so on the ground, if I was to kind
of like drop my eyes
and, um, I,
people like Patty Poor come up in in mind for me
because she's constantly, um,
letting me know and that that's great.
And I, I wonder how quickly, or how progressively
or how actually these, this will reach them,
each wau on the ground, wau and families on the ground.
I know it's, I mean, that's like a, well,
I don't know mental, but No, but I'm just interested too,
and, uh, probably it even connects to the, um, question
that our, my colleague asked recently about the, um,
the group that, that the advisory group that might be,
looks like might not happen or might not exist anymore. So,
Yeah. Yeah.
So, so thank you for that. Um, and, and you're right.
I mean, these things have to hit the ground
for disabled people and for danger Maori
and, um, you know, it, it
doesn't necessarily provide comfort for people,
but the, the reality is we have spent the year, um,
really getting these work programs, um, and,
and strategies in place.
The critical focus is on implementing those now.
And so we are fully in that stage
of developing the implementation plan.
And I think the thing about the New Zealand disability
strategy is there are actions which ministers have already
agreed to embedded in it.
So once we start delivering on those, then, you know,
inevitably we'll take, um, some time for that
to, to reach people.
I think, you know, one of the things that, um,
we heard a a lot through the development of the strategy was
around housing for Taka Maori.
And so we, um, again, this year took advantage
of a Maori housing conference
and started to build some, you know,
on the ground connections there around, well, actually
how are we going to provide, um, accessible housing
for t ha Maori and, and really building awareness
and giving support
and information to those, um, companies and organizations.
So, um, it's, it's,
you know, on all of us across government Yeah.
To make sure these things actually
make a difference on the ground.
Your question about the advisory group, um, like what, um,
the member was, um,
asking about was the national enabling good lives growth,
um, which the minister has determined that, um,
the ministry will have that core relationship with NEGL.
Um, but we have other advisory groups,
a strategic advisory group
and accessibility advisory group, um,
and we have t ka Maori equitably represented.
Thank you. So
Thank you. So just
to confirm there, that
that Maori advisory board was disestablished,
was, is that correct?
Oh, so you're, you're not saying that it was like,
um, awesome.
That's great to hear because there was a Maori advisory
group, sorry, I can't remember the name,
that Disestablish at the end of 2023
or the beginning of 2024.
I'm not sure what group norm referring to. That's case.
We've really absolutely strengthened the number of,
um, groups that we have, the very, very early
groups that helped establish the ministry.
The composition of those groups no longer exist,
but what we have now is a strategic advisory group.
We support the disabled, um, people's, uh,
organization, coalition, um,
we support the New Zealand sign language board.
So there are a range of organizations, um, of Wang
Maia represented on.
So I'm not aware of a
Awesome, I I'll, I, I was like, oh,
I'm pretty sure there was one,
but I couldn't remember the name.
So I'll go back and, and do written questions later on.
Um, just one more supplementary on that.
So with the disability strategy that's coming out tomorrow,
very exciting, um,
and obviously went out to, um, to the public
for feedback on that.
Is it correct that those focus areas were chosen without
consultation with dis disabled people?
And what could, like now in hindsight,
what could you have done to improve that consultation period
for choosing which, um,
which areas would be highlighted in the strategy?
So ministers wanted to have a strategy
that would focus on a number of areas
where demonstrable progress could be made over five years.
So that is really different than, uh, um,
previous New Zealand disability strategy,
which was over a 10 year period.
It was a strategy without actions embedded.
Those actions, um, took place.
Um, action plans were developed, you know,
in subsequent years, but what the minister wanted was areas
that we know through multiple sources
of feedback, um,
and results in terms of outcomes
that those five areas are critical to improving
for the lives of disabled people.
The strategy is an important piece of our work,
but it's just one piece of our work.
And so when you then add to that,
our accessibility work program, for example,
which touches on, um, the built environment, transport,
digital accessibility,
and emergency management, those are also areas, particularly
transport and the built environment that we also heard
through the strategy are really
important for disabled people.
So when you look in totality across our work program,
we believe we are tackling issues
of real importance for disabled people.
So you are confident some, would
You, oh, um, I've had a fair bit of feedback that
one of the areas that was raised as an important area
through that consultation was living,
but that wasn't then chosen as a category.
You've mentioned that ministers wanted actionable change in
areas that make a difference
to the lives of disabled people.
Was that feedback that you received as well on cost
of living being an important category?
And if so, why was not, what, why did that not make the cut?
I think, um, you know, ul ultimately
these are decisions for the government in terms of
what sits within this strategy.
Uh, I think if you look at some of our underlying things in,
in the strategy, there's probably two things.
I'd say. One, the strategy is broken into two parts.
It has a vision and principles,
and those are intended to apply to
all things that government does.
Not just those five areas,
but in terms of the way government delivers
and develops its services and policies.
Those vision and principles are intended
to apply across the board then with this.
Then the second part of the strategy is the specific, um,
actions across those five areas.
So we know that employment, for example, is a,
um, a, a a lever to assist with cost of living,
and we've touched on what we are doing in
employment and that gap.
So we did receive a wide range of feedback on the strategy.
Mm-hmm. And ultimately, what sits in
that strategy were those five areas that, um,
Did, did you receive feedback
On cost of Living being a significant area
that people wanted to see change on?
That should be a category though,
In terms Of not, not a category in its own right.
So, uh, yes, we received feedback around the being an issue
that, uh, is important for disabled people at the moment,
as it is for, you know, many, many other New Zealanders, um,
but not so much that, uh, it should be a, a category.
Okay. For action. Yes. Sorry,
I'm just gonna some clarity here.
I've heard a few questions
where I just haven't heard the answer. One
Is, did you vote,
because that was a question, um, that came up,
and I think the answer was that the priorities were set
by the government and you didn't consult
because that was their job.
Is am I right about
So that, so the minister determined, um,
with advice from us
around the critical areas affecting
the lives of disabled people.
Um, and that advice comes from, you know,
well understood outcome, poor outcome areas
and areas where we need to improve.
So the initial, um, consultation
was advice based on what we understood
and knew then the server, the, um,
disability strategy itself was the subject
of wide consultation throughout
New Zealand. That's your, is that your
10 year plan versus this five year
low hanging fruit thing?
No, the 10 year strategy is the previous strategy. Okay.
This strategy launched tomorrow
is the new refreshed New Zealand disability strategy,
which takes the next five years. That
Is the five, Yeah.
Okay. I've got a, um, uh, there's a couple
of questions arising out of your report, um, for the,
you know, annual report, 20 24, 25.
Um, so about one in six New Zealand's are
to say called the Status New Zealand, uh,
2023 household survey.
Uh, I'm curious, how does that compare to sort
of similarish countries in terms of that one,
one in one in six?
Is that, is that, um, relatively standard across countries,
or are we, are we sort of the high end,
the low end median? You know,
It's quite hard to make those sorts of comparisons.
Um, what we do know is that from the 2023
survey, we used measures
and a definition that are very well aligned
with international best practice in terms of
how you measure disability.
So we have a, a greater confidence in that one in six.
And could could you provide the committees maybe
afterwards if it just, just some, you know,
comparative information be, be useful?
Yes, by all Means. Thank you.
And just, just outta that report, I, I note that, um, uh,
some outcomes have improved that disabled people says, uh,
comparing census results between 2018
and 2023 shows a reduction in percentage
of disabled people with no qualification.
Uh, there are increases in percent of disabled children
participating in education and percent disabled people
employed, including increasing Maori
and Pacific disabled people
and small improvements also made housing
quality for disabled people.
Do, do you have any data on what helped shift
that in a positive direction?
There will be a range of things.
Happy to follow up with some specifics,
but I think, um, you know, you are right, there have been,
you know, some shifts overall.
We know that there is much more work to be done to improve,
improve outcomes overall.
Yeah, it'd be, it'd be great if you're able to circle back
with any information that can sort
of help inform our committee and what things are helping
move things in the right direction. Thank you. Thanks.
Um, This is, um, oh, sorry, I, I,
I had a, a new question from. Great. Thank you.
Um, thank you. Uh, your annual report, um,
states quite clearly that disabled people are more likely
to experience severe housing deprivation compared
to those who are non-disabled.
Um, some of the top issues that are raised
with me are related to housing.
Um, one of that of course is parents
of often adult intellectually disabled children, um,
who are in residential care facilities.
Um, also those young people
who are forced into such facilities
because there are no alternatives.
Disabled people who would rather flat
but have no other choice.
Now, F Kaha had a program, my Home, my Choice
that was working on security, um, in those
residential facilities and outside of it,
but also alternatives to residential facilities is
that it was funded for four years.
Is that program still ongoing or not?
Um, so the responsibility for
disability support services, which includes the provision
of residential care, moved to MSD, um,
as did any work on that program.
So FA Kaha is not doing specific work on that program.
Um, it may be a question that the committee would have
for MSD.
What we are doing is, as a touched on briefly
before, just circling back to housing being one
of the key outcome areas in the
New Zealand disability strategy.
So that program has moved to MSD from Faha?
Yes. Okay. Whether
Or not MSD is continuing that program.
Um, sorry, it just, it would be a question for you, Steve.
What, given that FICA ha's role now,
unfortunately has been complicated given the removal of DSS,
that's not, that's of course a
ministerial decision, not yours.
Um, but FICA has still has the responsibility
to improve the lives of disabled people, to engage
with disabled people in, to ensure that the work
that you're doing actually meets that age.
How do you get that information now, given that most
of the impact
or the turbulence, um,
to disabled people's lives has been in the DSS space,
and that's not within your purview,
also the residential care facilities,
given the pri prioritizing of entries
that was brought into play in August last year,
do you get information from disabled people on the impacts
of that, that then informs your work to improve their lives?
Yes. So the, um,
the longer answer to that question is
there are approximately 50,000 people in New Zealand
disabled people who receive disability supports.
There are 851,000 disabled people.
And our job is to ensure that
disabled people across the country thrive.
The provision of disability supports is critical
for those 50,000, um, people.
And, and as you say, MSD has that responsibility,
we get feedback, um, about a broad range of areas,
including the provision of disability supports.
We got really good feedback
through the New Zealand Disability survey engagement on, um,
the importance of DSS
and what improvements people would like to see.
And we also got feedback on a, a wide variety of areas
that we consulted on
and other things that people would like to see, um,
strengthened in the strategy.
We have worked really hard,
and I'll come back to these advisory groups
'cause we, we have a number that we work incredibly closely
with the disabled peoples organizations.
We, the leadership team meets with regularly all
of the other advisory groups that we have, which also, um,
include family and whanau.
So we are getting feedback, um, regularly about things.
And, you know, some of those groups,
while we didn't specifically ask them at the initial stage,
back to, um, the members
question about consultation on the strategy, um,
we certainly have received feedback that those five areas
are really important
to disabled people across groups that we work with.
So just one step on on that, um,
Bearing in mind that the physicians around
residential care facilities don't sit with fac.
I take that point however you have a stewardship role. Yes.
And therefore, I would assume that you would, um, be aware
of what's happening in that space and
therefore the impact on disabled people.
Um, back in August last year,
there was a new prioritization regime.
Um, those who were subject to a court order,
people exiting mental health facilities, orang, tamari.
It was very narrow.
Um, we were all hearing that families had worked
for five years to place
a loved one in a suitable residential care facility
that was gone overnight.
And that wait lists were gone overnight as well.
To your knowledge, has that been lifted so far?
And what are you hearing from people in that
who were waiting to get into residential care facilities?
Um, I'll be as helpful as I can,
noting that that question
is really more appropriate for MSD. So the
Decision around that is, is appropriate for MSS d
but you do have a stewardship role to advocate
for disabled people in that space, though.
My point on that was the question about whether
or not that has been lifted is a question for MSD, you are,
right, our stewardship role in terms of outcomes
for disabled people, um, we, we do have
that, have that focus.
At this point in time.
We are focused on measuring
and monitoring outcomes at a system
level for disabled people.
Not at this point a service delivery level. Uh, and time.
We may have the capacity to do that,
but at the moment it's at that outcome level
where we do have information
of the nature that you're talking about.
We absolutely do pass that on to MSD
and we have a really good relationship
with our DSS colleagues.
We also continue to maintain really strong relationships
with some of the big providers like IHC
and I, idea services, for example.
And so we have a work program with them, some
of which we hope will, will strengthen some
of the things you are talking
about. Your question, Maureen?
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I'd just like to turn your mind
to the external conversations that you may have with people.
And I'm thinking around, um, design of building.
So architects, councils, transport operators, is
that work complete, do you think?
Is the, is the information now embedded in what they do
and when they're designing or building new buildings,
or is there still more work to be done there?
Um, thank you for that question.
There is a lot more work to be done.
Um, I, you know, what I said at the start, um, that
most organizations we work with at all organizations we work
with want to do the right thing.
And I think there's a general understanding
that if you can do that design work upfront, you are likely
to get a, um, a better longer term result.
Our accessibility work program, um, across those areas,
I touched on before, built environment, transport,
digital accessibility, and emergency management.
We are working really closely
with organizations like Auckland Transport, for example, uh,
to help them roll out, um, training for things like, um,
assistance Dogs.
Um, we spent time at the Maori housing conference
that I touched on talking about, um, accessible by design.
Those are just a couple of examples.
Um, and housing actions in the disability strategy
that you'll see tomorrow, um, also points in that direction.
So there's certainly more work to be done.
And we know that accessible housing for disabled people,
you know, continues to be a real challenge
and we are really focused on, on trying to change that.
So, um, so I think the target is something like 15%
of new builds will be accessible.
Is that enough?
Um, Well, I think that
we would always want to see universal design
baked in from the start.
Oh, okay. Um, so that, um, when people want
to make an adjustment to a house, it, it's much easier to,
to do that if it's been universally designed by default.
So, you know, we, we would always want as many as possible.
The interesting, one of the really interesting issues
that's come up during the New Zealand disability strategy is
how we define what's accessible in terms
of housing in New Zealand.
And so while there has been a order commitment
around the 15%, um, a lot of the houses
that we build in New Zealand are not, um, houses.
And so we've had people involved in the working group, uh,
for the New Zealand disability strategy
who have also brought a private sector focus to this
and identified, for example, that, um, it is common for, uh,
retirement village units to be built fully accessible.
Um, because obviously there's a strong market for that.
And so some of these questions are around
how do we build awareness that actually, uh, a degree
of this is needed in other parts of the housing market.
And so, um, there's, it's,
there's quite a strong focus in the disability strategy
around those sorts of, um, discussions
and, uh, really broadening awareness of,
of the market that's there. Yeah.
Okay. So it's the quick supplement.
So, so is that advocacy work that that's been happening
with those, some
of those bigger providers that you've mentioned? It is,
Yes. Okay. Sorry, I'm nodding
Yes.
Uh, do sub first one on, sorry, very much start for this
and ling me down, and I appreciate your strategies coming up
tomorrow, but there's a whole lot of, um,
discussion at the moment, um, actually around, um,
a book Abundance, which is, is a client hoping about, um,
loosening up rules
because of both actually got in the way
of building next week.
I know that Chris Bishop is pushing this line heavily.
One of the concerns I have is
that those standards about building, um, as you move
to a market and you move away from any
guardrails on building accessible housing, uh,
I just don't know how that's gonna happen under that system
of releasing people from a lot of the regulation
and expectation of building the disability.
Can you tell me, how's that going in terms of your strategy
when you've got this wave of thought coming,
which said maybe it's counterproductive, maybe we just need
to get a whole lot of houses up.
So there's, there's, um, two parts, uh,
to respond to that.
The first is you touched on standards.
So we are doing some work
with standards New Zealand at the moment
to formally review building standard for 1, 2, 1.
So that's the standard around, um, accessibility
of buildings, uh, public buildings.
And the previous one is really old
and has quite a narrow focus to it.
Um, so we're working with standards New Zealand on that,
and that will give the industry, um,
much better guidance about what makes
a building truly accessible.
So that's one key deliverable, um, that we are working on.
And then the, the second is
we are just focused on wanting
to make sure we deliver the actions in the New Zealand
disability strategy.
And, um, that is our solid focus around,
I'm saying that's outside of
the scope of what you're doing.
Sorry about that. Those Discussions that I just raised,
which are like out there on fire at the moment,
are you saying that outside of the scope of what you do,
having those discussions when you're
building a strategy? So
We, we feed into, um, into all of these policy processes.
So, um, we are actively, um, involved in, uh,
cabinet papers and prodding for the views of disabled people
and, uh, any concerns that we are aware of
that might arrive from, um, regulatory proposals.
And so yeah, as, as cabinet papers, uh, get released, um,
you'll sometimes see
Thanks. Just on
building standard 4 1, 2, 1, um, how different
or how does that compare with the Life Mark standards,
perhaps Lifemark Silva?
I know that Australia's gone the way of adopting Qualmark,
I think is their equivalent as the minimum standard
for building, um, yeah, just keep getting to know
what the comparison is between the standard and lifemark.
Well, the current standard is quite out of date,
so the 4 1, 2 1, so, you know,
it doesn't include things like, um, modifications for people
with sensory, um, impairments, um,
doesn't reflect modern technologies.
It's, it's, it really just focuses on sort
of physical access, so it's quite out of date.
Yeah. In terms of how that specifically compares
to the LIFEMARK standard, I'd have to come back to you
and provide some written information on that.
Yeah, I, I was more talking about the, um, uh, updated
standard I guess that you are working on
and the comparison of that to lifemark
because Oh, so one of the things
that Australia has done is just adopt the
equivalent of lifemark.
Yes. So instead of that you are updating, you are working
with, um, standards New Zealand to update Yes.
Existing one. I'm just wondering
why and how different they are.
Yeah, So the first phase of the review
of the standard is to look at
what is happening in other jurisdictions,
including Australia, uh, and also Canada.
Um, our, uh,
NZ DS 4 1 2 1 is predominantly focused on public spaces,
so it doesn't deal with residential accommodation.
Um, but we are aware of some of those changes in Australia
and that has fed into the workshops
that standards New Zealand is now starting to run with, uh,
with the sector, um, to look at, uh,
what the next steps will be.
Um, there are a couple of pathways from here, one
of which is if there is an existing international standard
that would work perhaps
with some modification in a New Zealand context, uh,
there is an option simply to adopt
that international standard.
Um, the alternative is if there is no, uh,
appropriate international standard, then obviously we need
to create a new one here.
Um, and so that's where the process is up to at the moment.
Cool. Thank you. Your question, Laura?
Oh, and you and thanks guys.
Sorry, I've just got a bit of a knee throat going on.
Um, my question's about emergency management
and the role that you might be playing in this space,
because we know there is legislation being worked on.
Um, I'm just wondering does it cover also,
or are you involved with foreign emergency
and any of their res I know they updated 2018, sorry.
And we got just so bad. I need an interpreter.
Um, 20 20 18, um, around like the evacuation of buildings
and requirements here.
I don't know if you've had any thoughts about that
or are you part of any process?
Thank you for that. So, um, we
have heard through the various, you know, weather
and other events, um,
that New Zealand has had in recent years,
just the criticality of emergency management for
disabled people, which is why we, we have, um,
done some specific work in that area.
So, um, we've got a really close working relationship
with nema.
Um, we provided policy advice into
the system improvements program that NMA have been running.
We have formal membership
of various incident management groups across government
to make sure that the thinking about disability
is embedded from the beginning.
We've also been doing some work with NEMA
around rolling out some specific toolkits, um,
to help disabled people prepare well for, um,
for emergency responses.
I anticipate that as part of our accessibility work program,
uh, and the work that we do over the next year
that we'll do further, you know, more further work, um,
with NEMA and others involved in the emergency response, um,
including organizations like friends. Okay.
Your question. Thank you.
Um, so wanting
to talk about the single national assessment tool
and, um, the evidence that supports the use of it
and how the ministry ensures that it improves fairness
and accuracy rather than introducing new inconsistencies
or unintended reductions in support.
So what evidence shows
that the single national tool will improve accuracy
or fairness and support allocation?
Um, if I understand your question, right, um,
you are talking about the tool in relation
to disability support services.
Mm-hmm. I think that
that would be a question more appropriate for you, Ms.
D.
Okay. Cool. Thank you. Just
Go muddy metal.
Thank you. Just a sub actually, and then a pro brief. I can.
So, um, really, um, relating to the housing
COPA and the housing conference, which I was also attended,
and, um,
and there was a, there was a real, it was, it was a,
a, a change in the minds, I guess, of fa that are built
with in mind, right?
With the whanau a future in mind so that, um,
ideally all the houses that are built
have all those facilities that make it easier.
'cause at some point, ko, Heidi,
we all become aged and old and wonderful.
So that, so that,
and that, that showed up a lot in the,
in the Hapu conversations and Iwi conversations.
And I thought it was, uh, it, I think it, it it's,
there's the right link to what we discussing here
and just fully support if it just keeps going down
that track, um, just to keep driving it just, I mean,
if there's an appeal, um, a another angle to this is
that yeah, at some point you'll all be advantaged by this,
so let's just think about that.
So I just wanted to acknowledge that, um,
and just noting
how much it really caught on in the Maori spaces
and Maori building and our manufacture
and our housing projects in the far north particularly.
Yes. So I just want to acknowledge that.
Keep pushing that one. I, I certainly will.
Um, can I just take us to the data
and evidence gonna be the last question?
Oh, oh, okay. Okay.
So it's, um, so the report acknowledges some, um,
some data gaps, significant data gaps in it,
and I wanted to check with you around accessibility,
Maori specific outcomes, um,
and acknowledging your previous answers to the other levels
of my question and your responses.
Um, but just to plan your plan around the timeframe
for producing disaggregated data on
Maori and Tam Maori, if that's a, that's,
and then the timeline for that.
Um, and,
and the, just nothing around to the, uh, the in,
in assurance of Maori led input into the design
of data frameworks.
Yes. And this comes back to a little bit
of a discussion I had with, uh, uh, the previous, um, agency
around there's, there is an, there is a reasonable lack
of trust in terms of data and what might happen with it.
Um, um, so I, being careful in how,
how does your program and plan understand that
and consider that and protect that,
and then to that end, to the funding
and policy decisions for Maori providers.
So all linking. Yes.
I hope that links well enough in your mind.
So I'll make a couple of, um, high level comments
and then I, I'd invite, um, Ben
or Al to add anything further just on the,
I know you were just making a point on
that first one about ua, but your point is really important
because actually one of the things we're trying to do more
and more is to encourage people to understand that
actually when we do things that improve the lives
of disabled people, it's also seniors in New Zealand.
Um, as families, it's other people
who benefit from the sorts of work that, that we are doing.
So your point is well made, um, in terms of, uh,
timeframes, I'll, I'll come to to Ben on that in a minute.
Um, we have,
as you'll see from the disability strategy when it comes out
tomorrow, we've indicated, um, the outcomes framework
and the sort of indicators we are looking for.
And then what we are looking to do is where
that data is available, um, showing
the particular outcomes for Maori.
So Ben, I might just turn to you in terms of timeframe.
Yeah. Um, I, um, I mean a lot of this is dependent on, um,
having the administrative data available.
So as we collect more administrative data, um, Faha is
aiming to do that on the basis that we can, uh,
produce data on Tang Faha Maori
that is robust enough in terms of things like sample size
and so on to be reliable.
So, um, the administrative data that we,
that we draw upon has to, um, be
of a sufficient sample size to mean that we are able
to identify groups within that essentially.
So, um, I think you'll see more next year in terms
of a program of work around, um, our, our ability
to publish, um, more data sources as we work with, uh,
both a social investment agency
and other agencies on the
disability strategy monitoring framework.
What was I say? Just one more. Um, can you Yes.
Your question. Um, so I think just a couple
of things I'd like to say in responses.
One that we are in the fortunate, uh, position
to have an insights alliance kind of group that, um,
is made up of community, including Maori, um, uh,
leaders in research and evidence, um, and analysis.
They provide us with insights
and support in terms of, um, interpreting
and presenting data.
Um, so that's a really important, um,
mechanism we have in place, um,
in strengthening our relationship with the, from the forum.
We will also, um, be able
to look at the Data II leaders group and their aspirations
and involvement, um, in our, uh,
looking at our monitoring framework.
And, um, we did hear in the feedback on the disability
strategy refresh, uh, the monitoring function, um,
that we perform over the strategy over the five years is a
really important, um, area for Maori
to be involved and included.
Um, and so we are uh, looking at ways to respond to that,
um, in meaningful ways.
Um, and then just the final point you asked about Maori,
and I just want to make the distinction that, um,
as my colleagues have said, um, in areas
where in some areas there is really good,
robust sites are available for us to desegregate outcomes
and track and monitor how, how Maori are going compared
with other disabled, um, people.
However, in some areas that data is, is not as available
and is one area that we need to continue to strengthen.
Uh, so to earlier points that have been made around, um,
working with colleagues and agencies such
as ministry education, uh, we need to continue to ensure
that that data collection is happening there so
that we can track outcomes.
Well thank Rash we we're outta time now.
Thank for your time members community.